Note: This was suggested reading somewhere in NMA's Precourse or Intro Materials. It's authors are actuallly some of the organizers: Gunnar Blohm, Konrad P. Kording and Paul R. Schrater. 

https://www.eneuro.org/content/7/1/ENEURO.0352-19.2019

## Abstract
Within neuroscience, models have many roles, including driving hypotheses, making assumptions explicit, synthesizing knowledge, making experimental predictions, and facilitating applications to medicine. While specific modeling techniques are often taught, the process of constructing models for a given phenomenon or question is generally left opaque. Here, informed by guiding many students through modeling exercises at our summer school in CoSMo (Computational Sensory-Motor Neuroscience), we provide a practical 10-step breakdown of the modeling process. This approach makes choices and criteria more explicit and replicable. Experiment design has long been taught in neuroscience; the modeling process should receive the same attention.

## Significance Statement

Modeling in neuroscience is often perceived as a mysterious process and is hard to teach. Here we provide the first how-to-model guide that breaks down the modeling endeavor into a step-by-step process.


## Introduction

The development of models is an integral part of neuroscience and related disciplines, such as psychology, kinesiology, and cognitive science. Models can provide unique and useful insights. For example, computational models are used to compactly describe large amounts of data. Models are often used to obtain causal claims about the relation between neural properties and behavior. They make predictions and can thus allow more targeted experiments. Models allow virtual experimentation, making it easier to get intuitions. Models also force scientists to make their assumptions explicit, which makes scientific communication more precise. Finally, models can lead to applications across science, health care, and technology (e.g., one can plan interventions by simulating their impact on brain and behavior). Model-driven approaches thus accelerate progress across clinical and basic research.

There are countless models in neuroscience, and for each modeling technique we can find an article describing how it is constructed. For the more popular techniques, we can find textbooks that describe the mechanics of constructing and testing models, pitfalls, tips and tricks usually tailored to the particular types of data, and questions that made the technique popular. However, when approaching new questions, new data types, or different scientific goals and objectives, it is unclear how to start. Confronted with a phenomenon and a scientific goal, every researcher is faced with a difficult set of questions. Which concepts should we use? Which mathematical framework (i.e., technique)? Which code? What should the overall logic be? All these questions are currently unarticulated and hidden in the scientific training process, and students implicitly learn approaches across neuroscience through imitation and mentoring. While this can be an effective way of transmitting modeling techniques for ongoing questions, it is an ineffective way to train students to innovate, competently address new problems, or synthesize and extend methods. Instead, there should be a clearly structured thought process that clearly identifies how the phenomenon along with the goals of modeling give rise to the ultimate models. What is missing is a procedure by which we can address a phenomenon with modeling in a way that brings us closer to our scientific goals.

We have observed many students learning how to build models during our 8 year experience with CoSMo (summer school in Computational Sensory-Motor Neuroscience; www.compneurosci.com/CoSMo) where we taught students from senior undergraduates to seasoned researchers how to model. Through teaching and project work, we have tried to convey to them the process of constructing models from scratch. All three of the authors are also building models, and importantly we cover a broad range of types of modeling. This includes machine learning, Bayesian modeling, linear systems modeling, realistic muscle modeling, spiking neural networks, and single-cell models. In addition, we have brought dozens of leading computational neuroscientists as guest lecturers in the course, providing us with template examples of a broad array of successful modeling approaches applied to a diverse set of phenomena and questions. As such, we feel that we have experienced the model construction process in a uniquely cross-cutting way. While the modeling process is complex and multifaceted, we believe it can be formalized and made explicit.

Here, we propose a pipeline to modeling that breaks the whole enterprise down into a series of (sometimes interdependent) decision processes. Note that the approach outlined here is not the only way to approach the modeling exercise; rather, it represents one possible systematic, step-by-step approach that—if conducted carefully—should leave little room for failure. By using this approach, we have directed hundreds of CoSMo students in small groups through the full “from scratch” modeling process to successful conclusions in just 2 weeks.
